.\" -*-Text-*-
.\";;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
.\"
.\" File:         xpilot.6
.\" Description:  XPilot man page
.\" Author:       Bjoern Stabell & Ken Ronny Schouten
.\" Modified:     910520
.\" Language:     Text
.\" Package:      xpilot
.\"
.\" (c) Copyright 1991, UiT, all rights reserved.
.\"
.\";;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
.TH XPILOT 6 "Version 1.0" "BS & KRS"
.ad b
.SH NAME
xpilot \- XPilot/UX  Multiplayer gravity war game hand-shake program

.SH SYNOPSIS

.BR xpilot
[\fB-join\fR]
[\fB-list\fR]
[\fB-name \fInickname\fR]
[\fB-team \fIteam-number\fR]
[\fIserver-host\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
XPilot is a multiplayer game which looks a bit like \fBThrust\fP, the good
old action game for the \fBCommodore 64\fP.  Several clones have appeared
for various computers, among others \fBGravity Force\fP for the
\fBCommodore Amiga\fP.

The main objective of the game varies as you can choose different game
modes, although the only modes supported as of today are \fIcombat\fR and
\fIrace\fR.  The former mode focuses more strongly on shooting each other
down, while the latter is more a piloting test than anything else.

To start playing, you need only to connect to a \fBserver\fP by using a
small \fBhand-shake\fP program called \fIxpilot\fR.  If there are no
servers running, you will have to start one on your own (see man-page
\fIxpilots(6)\fP).

.SS Options

.TP 15
.B -name \fIplayer-name\fP
Lets you use an alternative name during the play (may be handy :).  If this
option isn't specified, and you haven't set the X resource \fPname\fP, you
will be known by your \fIlogin name\fR.

.TP 15
.B -team \fIteam-number\fP
Joins team number \fBteam-number\fR.  This has various effects - you cannot
harm another team member (and they cannot harm you), and you can see
(though not on radar) cloaked team-mates.  Note however, that you can
still harm yourself.  This option will probably be much more enhanced
in the future.  You may also specify a team number using X resources, see
below for details.  Team 0 is equivalent to no team.

.TP 15
.B -join
Automatically joins the first and best server.

.TP 15
.B -list
Queries status information from all servers found.

.TP 15
.B server-host
Tries to connect to server at host \fIserver-host\fR.  The default is to
search through the \fIsub-domain\fR your machine is connected to.

.SH PROMPT COMMANDS
When you startup \fBxpilot\fP without the \fB-join\fP option, you will get
a prompt asking you for directions.  You may type 'h' or '?' to list the
available commands.  These are quite obvious and deal with communication to
the current server only.  You may enter the game by pressing CR (Return/Enter).

If you are the owner of the server you will have a few extra options.  See
\fIxpilots(6)\fP.

.SH THE WINDOW
When you enter a game you will hopefully be presented a window.  This
window is divided into three major areas:
.RS 6
.TP 12
.B The radar
This area shows the map the server you are playing on is using as well as
the position of your fellow players (if they aren't cloaked).  In race mode
the radar also outputs the position of the control posts.
.TP 12
.B The player list
This area shows the list of players (sorted with respect to rating)
currently logged on the server.  A sample field looks like this:
.IP
.B 	*9	Selac			003		64
.IP
The asterisk (*) means that the player Selac (me) has the best
<rating>/<deaths> ratio.  You can also see that I am a member of team no.
9, that I have died 003 times and have a rating of 64.
.TP 12
.B The game area
This is where the action is.  Most notably you will see your fighter in the
middle of the screen, hopefully you won't see any shots or explosions yet!

You may also see some strange blue drawings surrounding your fighter - this
is the \fBHUD\fP (Head Up Display) which greatly simplifies and compresses
the information you need to know.  Currently, the HUD displays the
following information:
.RS 6
.TP 12
.B Special items
You may notice some numbers on the top left or bottom left corner of the HUD,
this means that you have either \fBs\fPmart shots (missiles) or \fBm\fPines
and the number indicates how many smart shots / missiles you have.  Smart
shots are shown in the bottom left corner (with and S prefixing the number)
and missiles are in the top left corner (with an M prefixing the number).

Also, other special items like \fBc\fPloaking devices, \fBw\fPide angle
shots and \fBr\fPear shots are only indicated by a letter appearing on the
left side of the HUD.
.TP 12
.B Fuel
A fuel meter will appear on the right side of the HUD when you are getting
low on fuel, it will start flashing when your fuel level gets dangerously
low.  The fuel is numerically displayed on the bottom right corner of the
HUD.
.TP 12
.B Lock
The name of the player you have currently locked on is shown on the top of
the HUD.  Also, the distance and bearing to the player is visualized by a
dot where placement of the dot gives the direction, and the size of the dot
gives the distance.  The dot will be filled if the player is not on the
same team as you.  The distance to the player also numerically displayed on
the top right corner of the HUD, it is measured in 'blocks'.
.RS -6

.SH GAME PLAY
This section will only describe the \fIcombat mode\fR of the game as the
\fIrace version\fR is quite straightforward.

The game has really no main purpose but to have fun.  This is achievable in
many ways, but mainly by \fBblasting away\fP on friends and cannons.  Both
will naturally fire back at you, so you will also need some nifty
\fBpiloting skills\fP and/or some heavy equipment to really enjoy living.
Another vital part of your machinery is your \fBenergy/fuel\fP - without
it, you will surely die a horrible death.

During the game you might encounter red triangles - these are special items
which will make your life easier.  As of today, these are:

.RS 6
.TP 12
.B F
More fuel.
.TP 12
.B C
Cloaking device.
.TP 12
.B R
Rear shot.
.TP 12
.B W
Wide angle shots.  The more you pick up, the more awesome your firepower gets.
.TP 12
.B S
Pack of smart shots (missiles).  Default is four missiles in each pack.
.TP 12
.B M
Pack of mines.  Default is one mine in each pack.

.SH CONTROLS
The game understands quite some keys, but not all of them are equally
important.  The following keys are in prioritized order, and note that a |
is used to separate equivalent keys.
.RS 2
.TP 4
\fIPrimary keys\fR
The primary keys are:
.RS 6
.TP 12
.B a
Turn left (anti-clockwise).
.TP 12
.B s
Turn right (clockwise).
.TP 12
.B shift
Thrust me.
.TP 12
.B return
Fire normal shot.
.TP 12
.B space or right-meta
Activate shield.  Must be held down for continuous use.
.TP 12
.B ctrl | f
Try to connect to nearest fuel station.  Must be held down during refueling.
.RS -6
.TP 4
\fISecondary keys\fR
The following commands are not always available, some require special items
to have any functionality at all.
.RS 6
.TP 12
.B q
Self destruct.  At last we managed to include a timer, got rid of all those
nasty I'd-rather-die-by-my-own-hands-than-let-you-kill-me-and-get-all-
the-points pilots.
.TP 12
.B backSpace
Enable/disable cloaking device if available.  You will be invisible on both
radar and on screen, but beware - the device is not foolproof, it is
not cheap on your fuel and the only thing becoming invisible is your ship,
i.e. the exhaust-flames will still be visible.
.TP 12
.B Esc
Toggle between two different settings.  You'll probably want more power
and a larger turnrate in combat than when you're doing some critical
maneuvering.  Also, the game speed (unfortunately) varies as the load of
the machines and the net varies.
.TP 12
.B Tab
Drop a proximity mine.  The mine will detonate after a certain amount of
time (quite large actually) or when a foe comes too near.
.TP 12
.B Home
Change home base.  You will need to be landed on the base of your choice.
(The \fBHome\fP key is located just right of the \fBReturn\fP key on most
HP-keyboards.)  These keys are convenient for HP keyboards, also somewhat
adapted to SUN keyboards.
.TP 12
.B p
Parking mode - you can only park while you're landed on your own home base,
and when you park, you cannot rejoin the game until the P has stopped
blinking (to prevent users from using this option to run away from a
battle).

.TP 0
The following keys toggle miscellaneous gauges.
.TP 12
.B c
Toggle on/off lock computer.
.TP 12
.B t
Toggle on/off fuel tank gauge.  A nice pie-chart representation of your
fighter's current fuel level.
.TP 12
.B v
Turn on/off velocity gauge.

.TP 0
The following keys are located on the keypad to the right on most
HP-keyboards.  They let you adjust miscellaneous values that are dependent
of machine speed (which may vary greatly).
.TP 12
.B *
Increase engine power.
.TP 12
.B /
Decrease engine power.
.TP 12
.B +
Increase turn speed.
.TP 12
.B -
Decrease turn speed.

.TP 0
The following requires that the \fBlock computer is on\fP:
.TP 12
.B \e (backSlash) | LF (lineFeed)
Fire smart missile if available.  The missile will home onto the player
that you have currently locked on.  You must have \fBa clear lock\fP on a
player for this to work.
.TP 12
.B Select | Up | Down
Will lock onto the closest player if he/she is within range.
.TP 12
.B Next | Right
Will, if possible, lock onto the next player in the game.
.TP 12
.B Prior (Prev) | Left
Will, if possible, lock onto the previous player in the game.

.RS -6
.TP 0
There is even a cheat mode, and a possibility to join the 'twilight-
zone boys' if you should be so lucky to hit the right key while the option
isn't disabled.  But don't lose any sleep over it, it's not that easy.
Usually, this option is disabled.

.SH X RESOURCES
XPilot understands the following X resources:
.RS 6
.TP 12
.B name
Nick name of your player.
.TP 12
.B team
Preferred team number.
.TP 12
.B power
Primary power setting of your engine.  Primary in this context means that it
is part of the default setting, secondary means the other setting (two
different settings are available, pressing \fBEsc\fP will switch between
them).  You may change "sensitivity" of your ship by adjusting these
paramteres.  Often you would like one setting to be more "rough" than the
other - one setting for fine maneuvering and one for racing. (Default 45.0)
.TP 12
.B turnSpeed
Primary turnspeed setting of your ship. (Default 30.0)
.TP 12
.B turnResistance
Primary turnresistance setting of your ship.  This value determines how
fast your ship will stop rotating, i.e. the rotating speed of your ship is
set equal to itself multiplied by this value.  Obviously the value has to
lie between 0.0 (exclusive) and 1.0 (inclusive).  (Default 0.12)
.TP 12
.B altPower
Secondary power setting of your engine. (Default 35.0)
.TP 12
.B altTurnSpeed
Secondary turnspeed setting of your ship. (Default 25.0)
.TP 12
.B altTurnResistance
Secondary turnresistance setting of your ship. (Default 0.12)
.TP 12
.B fuelNotify
The limit when the HUD fuel bar will become visible. (Default 500.0)
.TP 12
.B fuelWarning
The limit when the HUD fuel bar will start flashing. (Default 200.0)
.TP 12
.B fuelCritical
The limit when the HUD fuel bar will flash faster. (Default 100.0)
.TP 12
.B showHUD
Should the HUD be on or off. (Default true)
.TP 12
.B verticalHUDLine
Should the vertical lines in the HUD be drawn. (Default false)
.TP 12
.B horizontalHUDLine
Should the horizontal lines in the HUD be drawn. (Default true)
.TP 12
.B fuelMeter
Determines if the fuel meter should be visible. This meter visualizes your
fuel level in a different way than \fBfuelGauge\fP does.
.TP 12
.B fuelGauge
Determines if the fuel gauge should be visible. See \fBfuelMeter\fP.
.TP 12
.B turnSpeedMeter
Should the turnspeed meter be visible at all times. (Default false)
.TP 12
.B powerMeter
Should the power meter be visible at all times. (Default false)
.RS -6

.SH EXAMPLES
The simplest invocation of the hand-shake program is to just type:
.IP
.B xpilot
.PP
This will force the program to search after a server on all the machines
on your sub-domain (i.e. all the machines with the all but the last part of
the IP address in common).

Say this don't work (it often doesn't unfortunately), and you know where
the server is, and you don't want to be prompted (handy in scripts etc.),
you may type for example:
.IP
.B xpilot -join lglab08
.PP

In the examples above your name would be your login name.  Let's say you
want to be really cool and your login name is \fBgudmari\fR, well - you're
in loads of trouble if you don't know about the \fB-name\fR option;
.IP
.B xpilot -name FireEater
.PP
will fix the problem for you.

.SH WARNINGS
If the server should go down, you will be without autorepeat on your
keyboard.  To re-enable autorepeat, use the \fIxset\fR command with the
\fIr\fR switch, i.e.:
.IP
.B xset r
.PP
Also note that the game speed cannot be controlled, so that the only way to
slow down a game is to have several dummys join it.  Use the following
command:

.SH AUTHORS
The \fIxpilot\fP product was developed by Bjoern Stabell and Ken Ronny
Schouten at the University of Tromsoe, Norway.

.SH BUGS
The product is seemingly stable, so bug reports are highly appreciated.
Send email to \fBbjoerns@stud.cs.uit.no\fP or (not until 1993)
\fBkenrsc@stud.cs.uit.no\fP and we will see what we can do.  We only ask
that you remember to include the following information:
.IP
.PD 0
.RS 4
\- The platform(s) the bug(s) occurs on.
.TP
\- The version, revision and patchlevel of XPilot.
.TP
\- What the bug(s) looks like.
.TP
\- When the bug(s) usually occurs.
.PP
.PD
.IP
.RS -4
We would also like to receive changes you do to make the code compile on
your machine (we would NOT like to receive the whole program translated to
standard C, keep it ANSI :)

.SH NOTES
For credit list, see \fIxpilots(6)\fP.

.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 40
\fB/usr/local/games/lib/xpilot/motd.txt\fP
Message of the day.
.TP
\fB/usr/local/games/lib/xpilot/maps/\fP
Directory containing maps.
.PD

.SH SEE ALSO
xpilots(6)
.\"
.\" index		\fIxpilot\fR - multiplayer war game
.\" index		\fIxpilots\fR \- server module for xpilot
